Politico edited on Saturday morning a story claiming Donald Trump owes millions to the Bank of China for a loan on a New York City office building, hours after Breitbart News exposed the story as false.

The story now begins with a note that it has been “updated to include comment from the Bank of China and additional reporting.” Despite the initial story being substantively incorrect and getting several details wrong, Politico did not issue a formal correction, as standard journalistic good practice would indicate they should. What’s more, the story continues to be wrong in several places.

The original story’s headline was “Trump owes tens of millions to Bank of China.” Now it is “Trump owed tens of millions to Bank of China.” But that claim is still wrong. Trump never owed tens of millions to Bank of China, as Breitbart News reported Friday.  The subhead is” The president’s financial dealings with the state-owned bank complicate his attacks on Biden,” another false claim that remains in the story.

The Washington, DC, based media company falsely reported Friday that Trump owes millions to the Bank of China for a loan financing a building located at 1290 Avenue of the Americas. The story said that the president would have to pay tens of millions of dollars to the state-controlled banks because the loan was coming due shortly, a situation which it described as “unprecedented.”

Breitbart News reported Friday that the story was wrong. President Trump is not the debtor and Bank of China is not the creditor on the loan to 1290 Avenue of the Americas. Trump is the minority partner in a real estate deal that owns the building, had nothing to do with arranging the loans, and is not liable for their repayment. Bank of China was one of a consortium of lenders in 2012 that provided $950 million but sold its interest days later when the loan was repackaged into bonds for investors.

Politico now reports:

After the first version of this article was published, the Bank of China issued a statement Friday evening stating that it sold its debt on the building weeks after the 2012 loan on the property. Vornado Realty Trust owns 70 percent of the building.

“On November 7, 2012 several financial institutions including the Bank of China participated in a commercial mortgage loan of $950 million to Vornado Realty Trust,” said Peter Reisman, managing director and chief communications officer of Bank of China U.S.A. “Within 22 days, the loan was securitized and sold into the [commercial mortgage-backed securities] market, as is a common practice in the industry. Bank of China has not had any ownership interest in that loan since late November 2012.”

The story also said that Trump’s “financial dealings” with the Chinese bank undermined his campaign’s efforts to highlight that the election of Joe Biden “would be a gift to the Communist country and America’s chief economic rival.” The Biden campaign and its mainstream media allies have been pushing back against this by claiming that Trump has lately been “coddling China,” despite the fact that the Trump administration still has tariffs in place on hundreds of billions of dollars of Chinese goods.

That part has not yet been corrected, although it too is false. “The president’s financial dealings with the state-owned bank complicate his attacks on Biden,” the story still says. But Trump did not have financial dealings with the state-owned bank. He was a passive holder of limited parternship shares in a real estate trust managed by Vornado Realty, one of the biggest commercial real estate investors in the U.S.

The headline on the story claimes “Trump owed tens of millions to Bank of China.” That is also false. Trump never owed money to China, the Vornado controlled trust did. And China’s interest in the loans was extinguished in a matter of days, eight years ago.

The story also fails to convey the critical fact that Bank of China is one of the largest foreign investors in commercial real estate in the U.S., making its participation in the financing of 1290 Avenue of the Americas far from unusual. The deal was the first time a loan with a Chinese lender participating was securitized, meaning packaged into a mortgage-backed security and sold to investors.

More corrections are needed.





Friday on MSNBC’s Andrea Mitchell Reports, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) said “much more than” the initial $400 million for a vote-by-mail initiative will be included in the next coronavirus stimulus bill to enable “every person registered to vote” to receive a ballot at home.

When asked about President Donald Trump not favoring bailout funding for the post office, Pelosi said, “The post office has over 90 percent favorability among the American people. They depend on the post office as a public institution. Seniors now are getting — they have always been getting their medicine by mail for a long time now and now even more urgently. People are buying things that are telemarketing and the rest, and they’re being delivered by the post office. So at this time, any time, it’s a bad idea. It’s what they’re about, privatization, privatization, privatization. Let someone else go make money off someone that should be a public service for the American people. We will have to have that fight. We tried to get funding for the post office in the CARES one bill. We had some money in a bipartisan way, but the president I understand personally rejected it.”

She continued, “Let me tell you another reason he might be against it. We have to save the lives and livelihood of the American people. We also have to save our liberty, the life of our democracy. Voting by mail is central to this in any event, but at the time of the coronavirus, very essential. We had $400 million in CARES one. We have to have much more than that in CARES two so people can vote by mail.”

She added, “When the Supreme Court acting like party hacks said that the state of Wisconsin had to vote on that day and limited the importance of voting by mail, they were doing a Republican agenda, but the fact is is that having those people vote at that time was as if we invited them all to the Mardi Gras, probably caused more infections. People were standing in long for a very long time, keeping social distancing but nonetheless having to be out when they should be home. This issue of vote-by-mail and also saying every person registered to vote should receive a ballot and that we should have same-day registration for those who have not registered to vote. Opening the process, this is what our country is about, the vote, the sacred right to vote. I’m a former state chair of the party, and our purpose was always to remove obstacles for participation, whether they were Democrats, Republicans, independents, or whatever they were.”

At least 22 coronavirus-related suicides have been recorded in Thailand since March 2o, according to an independent study cited by Coconuts. Believed to have the world’s worst wealth inequality rate, poor people in Thailand have been hard-hit by the country’s recent economic slowdown, a byproduct of the lockdown imposed by Thailand last month.

On March 26, Thailand’s government announced a state of emergency due to the coronavirus pandemic, according to the Bangkok Post. This allowed for a partial lockdown in and outside of Bangkok, the capital, where the majority of businesses were closed. Unable to work for the past month, many Thai citizens living hand-to-mouth before the coronavirus pandemic have reportedly become desperate and suicidal. Most of those have failed to access government financial assistance, which Bangkok promised last month.

More than 24 million Thais registered to receive a monthly government payment of THB 5,000 [$155] over six months, expected to begin on April 8. The aid was intended for contract employees and self-employed workers who are not covered by Thailand’s social security system. According to Coconuts Bangkok, authorities have been unable to pay the monthly stipends, and many “informal workers” who applied for the aid were rejected by Thailand’s finance ministry.

On April 14, dozens of people protested in front of Thailand’s Ministry of Finance building in Bangkok over the department’s mishandling of the coronavirus financial aid. One of the protesters, unable to secure financial assistance through the government program, later killed himself.

Nam Jiamsupa, a 58-year-old Bangkok taxi driver, committed suicide in his home in the capital on April 18, Coconuts Bangkok reported on Thursday. Nam’s son told police that his father had become desperate because he did not have enough money to pay his THB 18,000 [$555] taxi lease for three months, and the THB 5,000 [$155] promised by the government never came.

In March, a mental health crisis hotline run by Thailand’s Ministry of Public Health received over 600 calls, compared to only 20 to 40 in each of the previous two months. Calls to the hotline are expected to exceed 600 in April as well, according to Coconuts Bangkok.

At press time on Friday, Thailand had reported 2,854 infections and 50 deaths from the Chinese coronavirus.

Last month, Reade revealed there was more to the story she told in April 2019. At first, she only accused the former vice president of unwanted touching and sexual harassment. Reade now claims Biden pushed her up against a wall and forcibly penetrated her with his fingers, while she was briefly employed by his Senate office in the early 1990s. She also claims that, before departing Biden’s office in August of 1993, she broached the topic of sexual harassment with the senator’s aides but did not mention the assault, which Reade alleges took place either in the U.S. Capitol or the Russell Senate Office Building.

The former vice president’s campaign, for its part, has vehemently denied the accusation. As the supposed assault took place nearly two decades ago. it has been difficult to corroborate fully either the accusation or the denial.

On Friday, however, Biden’s progressive critics suggested that a portion of Reade’s story was corroborated. The Intercept reported that Reade’s mother hinted at the alleged assault on a contemporaneous national television broadcast. Reade told reporter Ryan Grim that her mother called in to CNN’s Larry King Live around the time that she had left Biden’s office. “I remember it being an anonymous call and her saying my daughter was sexually harassed and retaliated against and fired, where can she go for help? I was mortified,” Reade said, according to Grim.

Initially, the Intercept determined a call that could fit the description — though not mentioning sexual harassment, firing, or retaliation, as Reade had recalled it — did take place on an August 11, 1993 edition of King’s show. The outlet, however, was unable to confirm that the woman in question was Reade’s mother, as it only had transcripts of the segment. It was able to determine, though, that the caller was identified as a woman from San Luis Obispo, California, where Reade’s mother was then living.

Shortly after the Intercept’s story was published, the conservative-leaning Media Research Council dug up video of the segment. Reade, who did not respond to Breitbart News by press time, told other outlets that she recognized the caller’s voice as her mother’s.

“I’m wondering what a staffer would do besides go to the press in Washington,” the woman says in the video. “My daughter has just left there, after working for a prominent senator, and could not get through with her problems at all, and the only thing she could have done was go to the press, and she chose not to do it out of respect for him.”


The vagueness of the 1993 call will likely entrench both sides of the debate over Reade’s allegations. For progressive #MeToo activists and staunch Bernie Sanders supporters, the call could be interpreted as proof that Reade did tell her mother about the alleged incident when it occurred. On the other hand, Biden supporters can point to the caller’s silence on the supposed assault, any other alleged harassment, and the identity of the “prominent senator.”

As this internal schism unfolds, Biden is still proceeding toward the Democratic National Convention as the party’s presumptive presidential nominee. Every major contender in the primary, including Sen. Sanders, has dropped out and endorsed the former VP. However, Sanders and Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) have said that Reade’s allegations deserve serious discussion.


Most Americans view China unfavorably, according to a recent Pew Research survey published on Tuesday. However the survey reveals that younger Americans are more likely to view China “favorably.”

The survey discovered that while younger people now hold increasingly negative views of China and are more prone to see the nation as a threat to the U.S., younger Americans nonetheless are still more likely than their older counterparts to view the Communist Regime favorably. More than 40 percent of Americans between 18 and 29 years old have a favorable opinion of China according to the survey, dramatically higher than older Americans.

Even so, roughly nine in ten U.S. adults see China’s power and influence as a threat, according to Pew Research, which added that 62 percent of Americans view China as a “major threat.”

“Older Americans are more concerned than younger adults about China,” reports Pew Research. “Nearly seven-in-ten of those ages 50 and older see China’s power and influence as a major threat, compared with roughly half of those 18 to 29.”

The findings also note that “this is the first year in which more than half of younger Americans also have an unfavorable opinion” of China. Just over half — 53 percent — of younger Americans view China unfavorably.

“But while half or more of those 50 and older have held negative views of China since 2012, this is the first year in which more than half of younger Americans also have an unfavorable opinion,” Pew Research reveals.

The survey also discovered a discrepancy among Republicans and Democrats, with Republicans more likely to hold unfavorable views of the Communist Regime.

“In some ways, this is a partisan story,” noted Pew Research. “Republicans continue to be more wary of China than Democrats across many questions in this report.”

“Nearly three-quarters of Republicans and Republican-leaning independents see China unfavorably, compared with roughly six-in-ten Democrats and Democratic leaners,” the report added.

As for young Americans, a poll last year revealed that a whopping 70 percent of millennials admit that they would vote for a candidate who identifies as a socialist.

Thursday during an interview with CNN analyst David Axelrod on his podcast “The Axe Files,” former Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams (D) accused President Donald Trump of being “afraid” of vote-by-mail because she argued it would “increase turnout and show that Trump was “illegitimate” and “should not hold office.”

Abrams said, “What’s happened in the last twenty years has been an acceleration by the right to constrict access to the vote because they no longer believe they can persuade the demographic majority of the country to agree with their ideas. So let’s start with that as a baseline. What we face with COVID-19 is an exacerbation of but also a concentration of the challenge that we face in this country the challenge that voters in Georgia faced in 2018, the voters in Ohio and Wisconsin and Florida have continually faced. And that is an artificial attempt to break the connection between being a citizen and having the right to express your views and choose your leaders.”

She continued, “We are pushing for in the vote by mail compulsion that we are trying to push up, that we are hearing that we need in the next CARES package is this, vote by mail is one way to ensure that we have safe, accessible voting and it is coupled with voting in person. There is no legitimate reason to remove both unless you are a state that has been doing this so long you have solved the issues of mass in-person voting. So instead, what we have is that we have to imagine a hundred people crowding into a polling place on Election Day were some number of those people may or may or be asymptomatic and where COVID has not gone. The goal is to get at least 75 percent of those people out of line. Get 75% of them out of line, and the way to accomplish that is to allow them to vote by mail. Every state in our nation has the capacity for vote-by-mail. The issue is making sure it is affordable and that the excuses are lifted, the requirements for excuses are lifted by the states who limit who has access. Of the remaining 25%, you want at least 10 of them to vote early because if you can spread out timing, then you can limit the likelihood that they are going to infect one another, and you can limit the number of personnel that you need in order to serve them. So by the time you get to election day, the only people who need to be voting in person are those who have no other choice.”

She added, “When Donald Trump says he doesn’t like vote by mail, he says it despite the fact that he has used it himself. And he dislikes it despite the fact that there is no evidence of fraud. We have had this form of voting for decades. The challenge that he sees is that it will increase the likelihood of those that are confined to home actually using that time to participate in the election. And anytime a leader is afraid of people speaking their minds and making their selections, he is illegitimate and should not hold office.”

During an interview with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) broadcast on Friday’s edition of HBO’s “Real Time,” host Bill Maher expressed concern about the amount of money the government is spending due to the coronavirus pandemic and stated that “It seems like it’s a house of cards that could, in the end, wind up hurting more people than the disease.”

Maher said, “I don’t know how you can just keep indefinitely writing checks. We were 20 trillion in the hole to begin with. And all world governments, who are already in debt, are doing this. How can the whole world be writing this funny money?”

After Pelosi said that greater investments in science and health will help the economy recover, Maher stated, “Well, it will recover unless people get wise to the fact that we’re just writing checks for money that doesn’t exist. … It seems like it’s a house of cards that could, in the end, wind up hurting more people than the disease.”

Professor Neil Ferguson, director of the MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis at Imperial College, London, is the scientist whose doomsday modelling — predicting up to 550,000 excess deaths — frightened Prime Minister Boris Johnson into imposing sudden and radical lockdown measures across the United Kingdom.

Five weeks into the lockdown — and with still no indication from the government of when it might end — increasing scrutiny is being focused on the scientific credibility of both the doomsday Imperial College study and of its lead author, Prof Ferguson.

Among the questions being asked is why — despite having promised to do so on Twitter — Prof Ferguson has still not made public his source code.

But still, there was no sign of Ferguson’s source code — the source code, let us not forget, on which depends the British government’s decision to hold most of the population under virtual house arrest and to close down a significant chunk of the world’s fifth-largest economy.

While it is true that Ferguson has released some code on Github, it cannot possibly be his original source code because, as he stated in the tweet above, that code was written in C.

The code published on Github is written in another language (R; plus some Python), suggesting that it is not the source code but a reconstruction of the source code.

Furthermore, the code published on Github is clearly incomplete. In order for published codes to have any value to scientists who wish to reproduce those results, they need to time-stamped at every stage of development (known as a “commit”), so that each amendment can be noted and checked, and every error (if any) traced back to its original source.

The Imperial College doomsday paper was published on March 16th. But the earliest commit in the Github code is on or about March 27th. Clearly, Ferguson and his team cannot have begun writing software to model the Covid-19 threat after they published their paper. So where is the evidence of their workings?

This is not an esoteric issue. For any scientific paper to have validity, a number of fundamental principles must be observed — or the paper is next to worthless. First, the methodology must be sound. Second, it must be reproducible — that is, other scientists must be able to check its workings and confirm that it is valid.

As things stand, this kind of software is known in the programming community as a ‘black box programme’ — you put numbers in, and other numbers come out, but nobody can see what’s going on inside and how or why it works. This is an advantage in some applications where you want to protect your code from plagiarism, but when it comes to making policy decisions for nations, it means no accountability.

What is clear from the responses on Twitter that software programmers and engineers are highly unimpressed by Ferguson’s failure to observe at least the second of these basic protocols.
