Harry had never believed
he would meet a boy he hated more than Dudley, but that was before
he met Draco Malfoy. Still, first-year Gryffindors only had Potions
with the Slytherins, so they didn’t have to put up with
Malfoy much. Or at least, they didn’t until they spotted a
notice pinned up in the Gryffindor common room that made them all
groan. Flying lessons would be starting on Thursday — and
Gryffindor and Slytherin would be learning together. “Typical,” said Harry darkly. “Just what I
always wanted. To make a fool of myself on a broomstick in front of
Malfoy.” He had been looking forward to learning to fly more than
anything else. “You don’t know that you’ll make a fool of
yourself,” said Ron reasonably. “Anyway, I know
Malfoy’s always going on about how good he is at Quidditch,
but I bet that’s all talk.” Malfoy certainly did talk about flying a lot. He complained
loudly about first years never getting on the House Quidditch teams
and told long, boastful stories that always seemed to end with him
narrowly escaping Muggles in helicopters. He wasn’t the only
one, though: the way Seamus Finnigan told it, he’d spent most
of his childhood zooming around the countryside on his broomstick.
Even Ron would tell anyone who’d listen about the time
he’d almost hit a hang glider on Charlie’s old broom.
Everyone from wizarding families talked about Quidditch constantly.
Ron had already had a big argument with Dean Thomas, who shared
their dormitory, about soccer. Ron couldn’t see what was
exciting about a game with only one ball where no one was allowed
to fly. Harry had caught Ron prodding Dean’s poster of West
Ham soccer team, trying to make the players move. Neville had never been on a broomstick in his life, because his
grandmother had never let him near one. Privately, Harry felt
she’d had good reason, because Neville managed to have an
extraordinary number of accidents even with both feet on the
ground. Hermione Granger was almost as nervous about flying as Neville
was. This was something you couldn’t learn by heart out of a
book — not that she hadn’t tried. At breakfast on
Thursday she bored them all stupid with flying tips she’d
gotten out of a library book called Quidditch Through the
Ages. Neville was hanging on to her every word, desperate for
anything that might help him hang on to his broomstick later, but
everybody else was very pleased when Hermione’s lecture was
interrupted by the arrival of the mail. Harry hadn’t had a single letter since Hagrid’s
note, something that Malfoy had been quick to notice, of course.
Malfoy’s eagle owl was always bringing him packages of sweets
from home, which he opened gloatingly at the Slytherin table. A barn owl brought Neville a small package from his grandmother.
He opened it excitedly and showed them a glass ball the size of a
large marble, which seemed to be full of white smoke. “It’s a Remembrall!” he explained. “Gran
knows I forget things — this tells you if there’s
something you’ve forgotten to do. Look, you hold it tight
like this and if it turns red —
oh . . .” His face fell, because the
Remembrall had suddenly glowed scarlet, “. . .
you’ve forgotten something . . .” Neville was trying to remember what he’d forgotten when
Draco Malfoy, who was passing the Gryffindor table, snatched the
Remembrall out of his hand. Harry and Ron jumped to their feet. They were half hoping for a
reason to fight Malfoy, but Professor McGonagall, who could spot
trouble quicker than any teacher in the school, was there in a
flash. “What’s going on?” “Malfoy’s got my Remembrall, Professor.” Scowling, Malfoy quickly dropped the Remembrall back on the
table. “Just looking,” he said, and he sloped away with
Crabbe and Goyle behind him. At three-thirty that afternoon, Harry, Ron, and
the other Gryffindors hurried down the front steps onto the grounds
for their first flying lesson. It was a clear, breezy day, and the
grass rippled under their feet as they marched down the sloping
lawns toward a smooth, flat lawn on the opposite side of the
grounds to the forbidden forest, whose trees were swaying darkly in
the distance. The Slytherins were already there, and so were twenty
broomsticks lying in neat lines on the ground. Harry had heard Fred
and George Weasley complain about the school brooms, saying that
some of them started to vibrate if you flew too high, or always
flew slightly to the left. Their teacher, Madam Hooch, arrived. She had short, gray hair,
and yellow eyes like a hawk. “Well, what are you all waiting for?” she barked.
“Everyone stand by a broomstick. Come on, hurry
up.” Harry glanced down at his broom. It was old and some of the
twigs stuck out at odd angles. “Stick out your right hand over your broom,” called
Madam Hooch at the front, “and say
‘Up!’” “UP!” everyone shouted. Harry’s broom jumped into his hand at once, but it was one
of the few that did. Hermione Granger’s had simply rolled
over on the ground, and Neville’s hadn’t moved at all.
Perhaps brooms, like horses, could tell when you were afraid,
thought Harry; there was a quaver in Neville’s voice that
said only too clearly that he wanted to keep his feet on the
ground. Madam Hooch then showed them how to mount their brooms without
sliding off the end, and walked up and down the rows correcting
their grips. Harry and Ron were delighted when she told Malfoy
he’d been doing it wrong for years. “Now, when I blow my whistle, you kick off from the
ground, hard,” said Madam Hooch. “Keep your brooms
steady, rise a few feet, and then come straight back down by
leaning forward slightly. On my whistle — three — two
—” But Neville, nervous and jumpy and frightened of being left on
the ground, pushed off hard before the whistle had touched Madam
Hooch’s lips. “Come back, boy!” she shouted, but Neville was
rising straight up like a cork shot out of a bottle — twelve
feet — twenty feet. Harry saw his scared white face look down
at the ground falling away, saw him gasp, slip sideways off the
broom and — WHAM — a thud and a nasty crack and Neville lay facedown
on the grass in a heap. His broomstick was still rising higher and
higher, and started to drift lazily toward the forbidden forest and
out of sight.



Dudley’s terrified voice broke in Harry’s ear. “W-what are you d-doing? St-stop it!” “I’m not doing anything! Shut up and don’t move!” “I c-can’t see! I’ve g-gone blind! I —” “I said shut up!” Harry stood stock-still, turning his sightless eyes left and right. The cold was so intense that he was shivering all over; goose bumps had erupted up his arms, and the hairs on the back of his neck were standing up — he opened his eyes to their fullest extent, staring blankly around, unseeing . . .  It was impossible . . . They couldn’t be here . . . Not in Little Whinging . . . He strained his ears . . . He would hear them before he saw them . . .  “I’ll t-tell Dad!” Dudley whimpered. “W-where are you? What are you d-do — ?” “Will you shut up?” Harry hissed, “I’m trying to lis —” But he fell silent. He had heard just the thing he had been dreading. There was something in the alleyway apart from themselves, something that was drawing long, hoarse, rattling breaths. Harry felt a horrible jolt of dread as he stood trembling in the freezing air. “C-cut it out! Stop doing it! I’ll h-hit you, I swear I will!” “Dudley, shut —” WHAM!  A fist made contact with the side of Harry’s head, lifting Harry off his feet. Small white lights popped in front of Harry’s eyes; for the second time in an hour he felt as though his head had been cleaved in two; next moment he had landed hard on the ground, and his wand had flown out of his hand. “You moron, Dudley!” Harry yelled, his eyes watering with pain, as he scrambled to his hands and knees, now feeling around frantically in the blackness. He heard Dudley blundering away, hitting the alley fence, stumbling. “DUDLEY, COME BACK! YOU’RE RUNNING RIGHT AT IT!” There was a horrible squealing yell, and Dudley’s footsteps stopped. At the same moment, Harry felt a creeping chill behind him that could mean only one thing. There was more than one. “DUDLEY, KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT! WHATEVER YOU DO, KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT! Wand!” Harry muttered frantically, his hands flying over the ground like spiders. “Where’s — wand — come on — Lumos!” He said the spell automatically, desperate for light to help him in his search — and to his disbelieving relief, light flared inches from his right hand — the wand-tip had ignited. Harry snatched it up, scrambled to his feet, and turned around. His stomach turned over. A towering, hooded figure was gliding smoothly toward him, hovering over the ground, no feet or face visible beneath its robes, sucking on the night as it came. Stumbling backward, Harry raised his wand. “Expecto Patronum!” A silvery wisp of vapor shot from the tip of the wand and the dementor slowed, but the spell hadn’t worked properly; tripping over his feet, Harry retreated farther as the dementor bore down upon him, panic fogging his brain — concentrate  —   A pair of gray, slimy, scabbed hands slid from inside the dementor’s robes, reaching for him. A rushing noise filled Harry’s ears. “Expecto Patronum!” His voice sounded dim and distant . . . Another wisp of silver smoke, feebler than the last, drifted from the wand — he couldn’t do it anymore, he couldn’t work the spell —  There was laughter inside his own head, shrill, high-pitched laughter . . . He could smell the dementor’s putrid, death-cold breath, filling his own lungs, drowning him — Think . . . something happy. . . .  But there was no happiness in him . . . The dementor’s icy fingers were closing on his throat — the high-pitched laughter was growing louder and louder, and a voice spoke inside his head — “Bow to death, Harry. . . . It might even be painless . . . I would not know . . . I have never died . . .” He was never going to see Ron and Hermione again —  And their faces burst clearly into his mind as he fought for breath —  “EXPECTO PATRONUM!” An enormous silver stag erupted from the tip of Harry’s wand; its antlers caught the dementor in the place where the heart should have been; it was thrown backward, weightless as darkness, and as the stag charged, the dementor swooped away, batlike and defeated. “THIS WAY!” Harry shouted at the stag. Wheeling around, he sprinted down the alleyway, holding the lit wand aloft. “DUDLEY? DUDLEY!” He had run barely a dozen steps when he reached them: Dudley was curled on the ground, his arms clamped over his face; a second dementor was crouching low over him, gripping his wrists in its slimy hands, prizing them slowly, almost lovingly apart, lowering its hooded head toward Dudley’s face as though about to kiss him . . .  “GET IT!” Harry bellowed, and with a rushing, roaring sound, the silver stag he had conjured came galloping back past him. The dementor’s eyeless face was barely an inch from Dudley’s when the silver antlers caught it; the thing was thrown up into the air and, like its fellow, it soared away and was absorbed into the darkness. The stag cantered to the end of the alleyway and dissolved into silver mist. Moon, stars, and streetlamps burst back into life. A warm breeze swept the alleyway. Trees rustled in neighboring gardens and the mundane rumble of cars in Magnolia Crescent filled the air again. Harry stood quite still, all his senses vibrating, taking in the abrupt return to normality. After a moment he became aware that his T-shirt was sticking to him; he was drenched in sweat. He could not believe what had just happened. Dementors here, in Little Whinging . . .  Dudley lay curled up on the ground, whimpering and shaking. Harry bent down to see whether he was in a fit state to stand up, but then heard loud, running footsteps behind him; instinctively raising his wand again, he spun on his heel to face the newcomer. Mrs. Figg, their batty old neighbor, came panting into sight. Her grizzled gray hair was escaping from its hairnet, a clanking string shopping bag was swinging from her wrist, and her feet were halfway out of her tartan carpet slippers. Harry made to stow his wand hurriedly out of sight, but —  “Don’t put it away, idiot boy!” she shrieked. “What if there are more of them around? Oh, I’m going to kill Mundungus Fletcher!"




Dudley’s terrified voice broke in Harry’s ear. “W-what are you d-doing? St-stop it!” “I’m not doing anything! Shut up and don’t move!” “I c-can’t see! I’ve g-gone blind! I —” “I said shut up!” Harry stood stock-still, turning his sightless eyes left and right. The cold was so intense that he was shivering all over; goose bumps had erupted up his arms, and the hairs on the back of his neck were standing up — he opened his eyes to their fullest extent, staring blankly around, unseeing . . .  It was impossible . . . They couldn’t be here . . . Not in Little Whinging . . . He strained his ears . . . He would hear them before he saw them . . .  “I’ll t-tell Dad!” Dudley whimpered. “W-where are you? What are you d-do — ?” “Will you shut up?” Harry hissed, “I’m trying to lis —” But he fell silent. He had heard just the thing he had been dreading. There was something in the alleyway apart from themselves, something that was drawing long, hoarse, rattling breaths. Harry felt a horrible jolt of dread as he stood trembling in the freezing air. “C-cut it out! Stop doing it! I’ll h-hit you, I swear I will!” “Dudley, shut —” WHAM!  A fist made contact with the side of Harry’s head, lifting Harry off his feet. Small white lights popped in front of Harry’s eyes; for the second time in an hour he felt as though his head had been cleaved in two; next moment he had landed hard on the ground, and his wand had flown out of his hand. “You moron, Dudley!” Harry yelled, his eyes watering with pain, as he scrambled to his hands and knees, now feeling around frantically in the blackness. He heard Dudley blundering away, hitting the alley fence, stumbling. “DUDLEY, COME BACK! YOU’RE RUNNING RIGHT AT IT!” There was a horrible squealing yell, and Dudley’s footsteps stopped. At the same moment, Harry felt a creeping chill behind him that could mean only one thing. There was more than one. “DUDLEY, KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT! WHATEVER YOU DO, KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT! Wand!” Harry muttered frantically, his hands flying over the ground like spiders. “Where’s — wand — come on — Lumos!” He said the spell automatically, desperate for light to help him in his search — and to his disbelieving relief, light flared inches from his right hand — the wand-tip had ignited. Harry snatched it up, scrambled to his feet, and turned around. His stomach turned over. A towering, hooded figure was gliding smoothly toward him, hovering over the ground, no feet or face visible beneath its robes, sucking on the night as it came. Stumbling backward, Harry raised his wand. “Expecto Patronum!” A silvery wisp of vapor shot from the tip of the wand and the dementor slowed, but the spell hadn’t worked properly; tripping over his feet, Harry retreated farther as the dementor bore down upon him, panic fogging his brain — concentrate  —   A pair of gray, slimy, scabbed hands slid from inside the dementor’s robes, reaching for him. A rushing noise filled Harry’s ears. “Expecto Patronum!” His voice sounded dim and distant . . . Another wisp of silver smoke, feebler than the last, drifted from the wand — he couldn’t do it anymore, he couldn’t work the spell —  There was laughter inside his own head, shrill, high-pitched laughter . . . He could smell the dementor’s putrid, death-cold breath, filling his own lungs, drowning him — Think . . . something happy. . . .  But there was no happiness in him . . . The dementor’s icy fingers were closing on his throat — the high-pitched laughter was growing louder and louder, and a voice spoke inside his head — “Bow to death, Harry. . . . It might even be painless . . . I would not know . . . I have never died . . .” He was never going to see Ron and Hermione again —  And their faces burst clearly into his mind as he fought for breath —  “EXPECTO PATRONUM!” An enormous silver stag erupted from the tip of Harry’s wand; its antlers caught the dementor in the place where the heart should have been; it was thrown backward, weightless as darkness, and as the stag charged, the dementor swooped away, batlike and defeated. “THIS WAY!” Harry shouted at the stag. Wheeling around, he sprinted down the alleyway, holding the lit wand aloft. “DUDLEY? DUDLEY!” He had run barely a dozen steps when he reached them: Dudley was curled on the ground, his arms clamped over his face; a second dementor was crouching low over him, gripping his wrists in its slimy hands, prizing them slowly, almost lovingly apart, lowering its hooded head toward Dudley’s face as though about to kiss him . . .  “GET IT!” Harry bellowed, and with a rushing, roaring sound, the silver stag he had conjured came galloping back past him. The dementor’s eyeless face was barely an inch from Dudley’s when the silver antlers caught it; the thing was thrown up into the air and, like its fellow, it soared away and was absorbed into the darkness. The stag cantered to the end of the alleyway and dissolved into silver mist. Moon, stars, and streetlamps burst back into life. A warm breeze swept the alleyway. Trees rustled in neighboring gardens and the mundane rumble of cars in Magnolia Crescent filled the air again. Harry stood quite still, all his senses vibrating, taking in the abrupt return to normality. After a moment he became aware that his T-shirt was sticking to him; he was drenched in sweat. He could not believe what had just happened. Dementors here, in Little Whinging . . .  Dudley lay curled up on the ground, whimpering and shaking. Harry bent down to see whether he was in a fit state to stand up, but then heard loud, running footsteps behind him; instinctively raising his wand again, he spun on his heel to face the newcomer. Mrs. Figg, their batty old neighbor, came panting into sight. Her grizzled gray hair was escaping from its hairnet, a clanking string shopping bag was swinging from her wrist, and her feet were halfway out of her tartan carpet slippers. Harry made to stow his wand hurriedly out of sight, but —  “Don’t put it away, idiot boy!” she shrieked. “What if there are more of them around? Oh, I’m going to kill Mundungus Fletcher!




